## Project Title
The Impacts of Federal Reserve’s interest rate on the housing market and various industrial production sectors
## Project Overview
The focus of this study is to investigate the effects the Federal Reserve’s interest rate hikes have on the housing market and subsequent industrial production sectors. The Federal Reserve System is the central bank of the United States. It performs functions to promote the effective operation of the United States economy, and more generally, the public interest. One of their main functions is to conduct the nation’s monetary policy to promote maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates in the United States economy.
Consumers have been experiencing an increase in the prices of goods and services. This increase is called inflation. Inflation cannot be measured by an increase in the cost of a single product or service. Instead, inflation is the general increase in the overall price level of all goods and services in the economy. The Federal Reserve will combat inflation by increasing the Federal Funds Target Rate. This is the rate that banks pay and receive when they borrow and lend funds. A rate increase, also known as rate hike, will in turn cause rate increases on other rates such as savings rates, credit card rates, auto loan rates, and in our primary focus, home mortgage rates. By raising the rates, the Federal Reserve will try to stabilize overall consumer prices and reduce inflation.
Just as certain industrial sectors have various degrees of inflation, the impact of the federal rate hikes will also vary across the different industries. One of the sectors most notably impacted is the housing market because a small increase in mortgage rates can cause a large increase in the cost to finance a home. This in turn slows the housing market at a faster rate than other sectors. The rapid deceleration of the housing market has ripple effects across a broad range of sectors. The point of this project is to investigate which sectors were most impacted and to answer the question of what impact the Federal Reserve’s interest rate increases had on the housing market, and the subsequent impact on various industrial production sectors.
While it is widely known that federal interest rate hikes will directly affect the housing market, it is lesser known the effects the increases will have on subsequent industries that rely on a strong housing market. The motivation for this project is to uncover and quantify the relationships between the housing market and various industrial sectors by applying sound, statistical methods using time series analysis.
Time series analysis is a specific way of analyzing a sequence of data points that are collected over a period of time. In the context of this project, the downturn of the housing market and industrial sectors does not happen at the same time as the federal rate hikes. There is a delay between the rate hike and the housing market. There are potentially numerous delays between the housing market and various industry sectors. These delays in terms of time series analysis are more commonly known as “lag”. In this project, we will account for this lag by shifting the datasets to quantify the autocorrelation between the federal rate hike, housing market, and subsequent industrial sectors.
